# PROTOCOL

```
data State = Client NodeID [Int]
           | ServerIdle 
           | ServerRun NodeID [Int]

mapInc :: Protlet State
mapInc = ARPC "mapInc" clientStep serverRec serverSend
  where
    clientStep = \case
      Client server ns -> 
        Just (server, ns, Client server)
      _ -> 
        Nothing
    
    serverIdle Msg{..} = \case
      ServerIdle ->
        Just (ServerRun _msgFrom _msgBody)
      _ ->
        Nothing

    serverSend = \case
      ServerRun client ns ->
        Just (client, (+1) <$> ns, ServerIdle)
      _ ->
        Nothing
```

# IMPLEMENTATION

## Single threaded

```
server1 :: Label -> M a
server1 l = do
  mmsg <- receive[ServerReceive(mapInc)] l 
  case mmsg of
    Nothing ->
      return ()
    Just (_, client, ns, _) ->
      send[ServerResponse(mapInc)] l client ((+1) <$> ns)
  server1 l
```

network traces will be strictly

receive(m); send(response(m)); receive(m'); send(response(m'));...

## 2-threaded

```
type Job = (NodeID, [Int])
type OPB a = Ref (Maybe a) -- One Place Buffer

put :: a -> OPB a -> M ()
put a r = do
  b <- CAS r Nothing (Just a)
  if b
    then return ()
    else put a r

take :: OPB a -> M a
take r = do
  ma <- read r
  case ma of
    Nothing ->
      take r
    Just a -> do
      b <- CAS r (Just a) Nothing
      if b
        then return a
        else take r

server2 :: Label -> M a
server2 l = do
  r <- newRef Nothing
  par [listener l r, handler l r] undefined

listener :: Label -> OPB Job -> M a
listener l r = do
  mmsg <- receive[ServerReceive(mapInc)] l 
  case mmsg of
    Nothing ->
      return ()
    Just (_, client, ns, _) ->
    put (client, ns) r
  listener l r

handler :: Label -> OPB Job -> M a
handler l r = do
  (client, ns) <- take r
  send[ServerResponse(mapInc)] l client ((+1) <$> ns)
  handler l r
```

Network traces here are the same as in the sequential setting.

Desiderata:
  - the _send_ of the handler is only performed _if_ the listener has received a request. We would like a spec like:
   
    ```
      send[ServerResponse(p)] l nid msg : 
        { CanRespond(p.serverSend) /\ 
          n |->_l Running s /\
          p.serverSend(s) = Just(nid, msg, s') }
        { ret. ret = () /\ n |->_l Running s' }                         
    ```

  - the request is transferred via the One Place Buffer, and the _knowledge_ of the state s of the nodes involved in the protocol should be transferred with it.

## Proof

### First Attempt!

  We enrich the OPB with an invariant, and a predicate to connect this, where `n` is the local node identifier: 
   ```
    (r :: OPB a I) iff r |->_n ma /\ I ma
   ```

   this yields the following spec for the `put` and `take` operations:

   ```
     put x r : { r :: OPB a I /\ I (Just x) }
               { ret. ret = () /\ r :: OPB a I }
     take r : { r :: OPB a I }
              { ret. ret = a /\ I (Just x) }
   ```

   we instantiate the invariant as follows:

     I ma iff (ma = Nothing /\ n |->_l Running ServerIdle) \/
              (exists c ns, ma = Just (c, ns) /\ n |->_l Running (ServerJob c ns)) 

  this way we can CAS the reference from `Nothing` to `Just ...` and vice versa supplying appropriate evidence to perform the swap.

  However, this means the _send_ must take place at the same time as the CAS, as we learn from the CAS that the server is processing, and has the permission to respond to the client. This is the resource needed to guard the send. The send yields evidence we're in the ServerIdle state, and this needs to be propagated back to the handler. This requires information to flow backwards from the `handler` to the `listener`. This can only happen by communication via the shared memory. But what we want to communicate is that something has taken place in the network.

  Some possibilities:
  1. We introduce atomic operations that perform both network and shared-memory operations. 
  2. Perhaps the "node n is running in state s" is not the right abstraction for resources guarding protocol actions. 
    - Perhaps we should focus on the `CanRespond` view. Thinking ahead to the two phase commit, we meet new complications to this scheme. Entering the "MakeDecision" state of the client can either respond "Yes" or "No". Either transition is permissible, so if these resources are presented as seperable resources to the current thread, then one can be invalidated by another thread performing the other action.
  3. Another possibility might be some Caper-like regions assertions like
    ```
    protlet(l,n,mapInc,s) 
    ```
    saying node `n` is participating in protlet `mapInc` instance `l`, and we know the local node state in that protocol is `s`.

    We then need accompanying resources to guard updates to `s`. These resources will also define the interference on `s`. 

    The difference to Caper is that there is no interpretation of states. They are abstract protocol states. The statespace is whatever the protlet context is defined over.

    `protlet(l, n, mapInc, __)` is stable.
    `protlet(l, n, mapInc, s)` is stable as long as we own sufficient resources to ensure no other thread can transition from `s`. That is, for example,
      * `protlet(l, n, mapInc, ServerIdle)` is stable if we own `CanReceiveARPC(l,n,mapInc)`.
      * `protlet(l, n, mapInc, ServerJob c ns)` is stable if we own `CanRespondARPC(l,n,mapInc)`

    We know transitions _from different states_ can never be valid at the same time. Hence we want `CanReceiveARPC * CanRespondARPC <=> False`

    A node is only ever in one particular state, so `protlet(l, n, p, s) * protlet(l, n, p, s') <=> s = s'`

    In the troublesome cases we should probably own both resources e.g. in case of respondOK or respond




### Second Attempt

  The first attempt fails because there is no way for the handler to communicate back to the listener that the send is complete. It can only signal that the OPB has been emptied. 

  We could let the `listener` _learn_ that it is in the _ServerIdle_ state by trying to receive the request, thereby gainining the knowledge that the rest of the network "expects" us to be in a given state.

  >This feels somewhat unsatisfactory. 

  I.e. we have a receive spec like

  ```
  receive[ReceiveARPC(p)] l :
    { emp }
    { ret. exists s. 
        if ret == Nothing 
          then emp
          else ret = Just msg /\
               p.serverReceive(msg, s) = Just s' /\
               n |-> Running s' /\
               "Gain resources enabling transitions from s'" }
  ```

instead of something _ensuring_ we are in an appropriate state for the protocol.

  ```
  receive[ReceiveARPC(p)] l :
    { n |-> Running s }
    { ret. 
        if ret == Nothing 
          then n |-> Running s
          else ret = Just msg /\
               p.serverReceive(msg, s) = Just s' /\
               n |-> Running s' /\
               "Gain resources enabling transitions from s'" }
  ```

The point of a 'weakening' like this is to let the `listener` part of the server implementation _try_ to receive a message without needing to wait for the `handler` to complete the `send`. 

The "emerging" spec from this will ensure "protocol fidelity" but it's not immeadiately clear how to make that precise.

### Third Attempt

We have two states for the server - it is performs a receive from one to the other, and a send to go back again. The initial state is the one awaiting the receive. Receiving the request from a client yields the obligation to send a message `MustSend` which is linear. That is, it can and must be consumed by sending a message.

If we start in the `ServerIdle` state without any resources (specifically the `MustSend`), we can reason that either no transition has ever happened, or the next receive we do must be from the `ServerIdle` state. I.e.
```
Inv(Nothing) = True
Inv(Just (client, ns)) = MustSend

listener :: Label -> OPB Job -> M a
listener l r = do
  { r : OPB Job Inv }
  mmsg <- receive[ServerReceive(mapInc)] l  <<<----- (1)
  { r : OPB Job Inv /\ (mmsg = Nothing \/ (mmsg = Just msg /\ MustSend(l))) }
  case mmsg of
    Nothing ->
      { r : OPB Job Inv }
      return ()
      { r : OPB Job Inv}      
    Just (_, client, ns, _) ->
      { r : OPB Job Inv /\ MustSend(l) } 
      put (client, ns) r
      { r : OPB Job Inv }
  { r : OPB Job Inv }
  listener l r
  { False }

handler :: Label -> OPB Job -> M a
handler l r = do
  { r : OPB Job Inv }
  (client, ns) <- take r
  { r : OPB Job Inv /\ MustSend(l) }
  send[ServerResponse(mapInc)] l client ((+1) <$> ns) <<<---- (2)
  { r : OPB Job Inv }
  handler l r
  { False }
```

There are 2 points in these programs where we must take neighbouring threads' network interference into account - (1) and (2). The send and receives are atomic network operations, so are the only places we need to take interference into account.

At (2), we own `MustSend` which is incompatible with any other guards - the rely is empty (or, I guess, reflexive): the local environment cannot take any protlet actions for the local node. We must be in the state `ServerJob` and we hold the obligation to respond.

At (1), we own no obligations, so we don't know where in the network we are. They may be other threads racing to receive the same message we are trying to receive, but if they have, then they have also gained the obligation to respond to it, and, hence, must have ensured that the obligation is fulfilled. When we eventually do receive the appointed message, we obtain the obligation to send, and hence know we are in the `ServerJob` state. The rely before this program point is thus the total relation - the neighbouring threads can do anything - and the same as (2) after this receive.

The specs of send and receive for the ARPC protlet is thus something like

```
  receive[ReceiveARPC(p)] l :
    { emp }
    { ret. 
        if ret == Nothing 
          then emp
          else exists s. ret = Just msg /\
               p.serverReceive(msg, s) = Just s' /\
               n |->_l Running s' /\
               MustSend(l, p.serverSend) }

  send[RespondARPC(p)] l nid msg : 
    { MustSend(l,p.serverSend) /\ 
      n |->_l Running s /\
      p.serverSend(s) = Just(nid, msg, s') }
    < ret. ret = () /\ n |->_l Running s' > <<-- atomically, but at the time of return, we don't know
    { ret. ret = () }
```

## Single-Threaded implementation using Send Obligations

The following makes no use of shared-memory state, but must nonetheless take into account local threads' interference on network and shared-memory operations.

```
server1 :: Label -> M a
server1 l = do
  { emp }   -- (1)
  mmsg <- receive[ServerReceive(mapInc)] l 
  { exists s. if ret == Nothing 
          then emp
          else ret = Just msg /\
               p.serverReceive(msg, s) = Just s' /\
               n |->_l Running s' /\
               MustSend(l, p.serverSend) } -- (2)
  case mmsg of
    Nothing ->
      { emp } -- (3)
      return ()
      { emp } -- (4)
    Just (_, client, ns, _) ->
      { exists s. p.serverReceive((_,client,ns,_), s) = 
                    Just (ServerJob client ns) /\
        n |->_l Running (ServerJob client ns) /\
        MustSend(l, p.serverSend) } ==> -- (5)
      { n |->_l Running (ServerJob client ns) /\
        MustSend(l, p.serverSend) /\
        p.serverSend(ServerJob client ns) = Just (client, (+1) <$> ns, ServerIdle) } -- (6)
      send[ServerResponse(mapInc)] l client ((+1) <$> ns)
      { emp } ==> -- (7)
  { emp } -- (8)
  server1 l
  { False } -- (9)
```

(1): Starting from a global state `s` owning no resources, the interference is total - anything can happen. We must start with zero assumptions on the state. Rely(emp) = { (s, s') | True }? Though I guess we can be slightly more intelligent than `True` -- protocols stay within protocol bounds.

(2): Completing the attempted receive is an atomic operation. It may remove the received message from the message soup (or marked it as delivered). We must inspect the returned value to know whether the state is changed. We still don't own neither network nor shared-memory resources, so the rely is still the total relation.

(3)-(4): In the failed case, the story is short.

(5): in the successful case, we learn there is an `s` such that `p.serverReecive((_, client, ns_), s) = Just (ServerJob client ns)` (hence `s == ServerIdle` by the definition of `serverReceive`. The message soup has been updated to mark a `mapInc` message delivered. All This must mean that the current node passed from the `ServerIdle` to the `ServerJob` state. We gain a resource enabling (and obligating) us to make the corresponding send transition. 

The state as described is stable: the presence of the unique, non-duplicable `MustSend(l, p.serverSend)` resource ensures the protocol state of the local node remains `n |->_l Running (ServerJob client ns)`.

(6): Is a simple extension with a pure fact.

(7): The send consumes the `MustSend` -- we lose the guard from our state, and the rely now is total again -- the protocol can be in any state from this program point onwards. The `n |->_l Running _`.


